In terms of life, In terms of life's experience, we can categorize the fires
into three forms within us.
One is known as jataragni.
Jatara literally means stomach or the digestive process
the digestive fire.
Without a little bit of fire in your belly, you cannot digest the food that you eat because
the food is just functioning as fuel
and you need to break down the fuel
to release the energy that's needed. So, there is a digestive fire going on.
If this digestive fire is well-nourished or well supplied with fuel,
it also becomes reproductive fire. So, these two dimensions of
digestion and reproductive fire, together we can call them as jataragni.
If your jataragni is strong, if you've maintained your jataragni well,
you will have a robust body.
The other dimension is called chitagni.
In between, there are various classifications but
I don't want to complicate your existence, I'm making it
simple for you. One is physical, another is
the dimension of the mind and beyond. It's called chitagni.
If you move to the next dimension of the fire,
which is called bhootagni – that is elemental fire
if your elemental fire is on, you will see that
the circus of the body and mind doesn't make much sense to you.
Your interest and your focus will completely shift to another dimension
of creation. More fundamental aspect of creation
as to the very way life is happening rather than
being entertained by the antics of the body and the mind.
So, these three aspects – if one takes charge of jataragni,
you have a healthy and robust body, if you take charge of your chitagni,
you have a mind which will find
many uses of course, but if you have
mastery or some
ability to manage your bhootagni, then you have
fundamental mastery over life process.
Beyond this, there is something called as sarvagni because
the physical dimension of the existence
or the physical dimension of this universe or the creation,
as… according to modern science is less than two percent.
So, if you know the entire universe, you know two percent of the existence.
So, sarvagni is that dimension which touches
where there is no elements, where there is no creation
as you know it, or in other words, where there is no physical nature.
Generally,
a yogi, who wants to access the nature of life,
will not interest himself in jataragni,
chitagni, bhootagni.
He will focus only on sarvagni because
this is the ultimate fire
but it's a very cool fire. It does not burn like jataragni.
It's a very obvious fire – the digestive fires.
Chitagni is not so obvious but very much there.
Bhootagni – not so visible at all but very much there.
Sarvagni almost feels like it's absent but without it, nothing would happen.
It's a fundamental fire or it's the ultimate fire
which holds all other fires within it.
In our rituals yagnas and homas, etc. we offer food
And several other stuff into the homakund
It is said that fire would be a medium to take on the offerings to god.
Could you please speak about this?
My mother even today offers some part of the cooked food to the fire
Saying that this offering is for god.
What is happening here?
If you are a bad cook, it's a good thing to do
No, no, I'm not saying your mother is a bad cook but… She is
in Andhra Pradesh, she must be good
But if you are a bad cook, it's a good thing to do.
Instead of putting it into this jataragni
putting into the fire
is safe for everybody.
But otherwise, the idea is
you need to understand this
what you see as the current rituals are remnants of
an elaborate science, which existed at one time.
So, these remnants have taken on their own forms.
Offering of food into the fire was an important part.
Before…
This is a part of, you know, you must see the rituals, elaborate rituals
that… I think in that
Kakinada region,
the Hoysalas in Karnataka, the Bijjalas,
maybe the Rajputs, maybe the Marathas also had,
they had elaborate rituals before armies went into battle.
All these rituals were mainly focused towards creating or
firing up jataragni in the soldiers or the armed forces
full of fire. They don't want chitagni.
If a soldier thinks for himself, it's bad for the war
He should not think. He must simply do what he is asked to do.
He is full of fire here . No fire here, no fire around, just here
So, rituals were created where jataragni is the thing.
So before going to war, elaborate rituals
to fire up the jataragni, so that individual people don't think for themselves because
if all of them think, it will not go anywhere.
A few people must think, others must just do.
It's… It is coming from a certain wisdom. Today,
our armies are trying to do the same thing by marching
"Left, right, left, right, turn around, turn around, this, do this, do that."
Nobody knows why they're turning round and round but the thing is
to beat the mind down in such a way that you don't try to reason about
everything because when extreme conditions are there,
if everybody thinks for themselves, it will go crazy.
Somebody who knows what it is must think, others must just do.
That's the way to make those situations most effective.
So, it comes from that culture of offering food,
so that the ritual was about building jataragni in a huge way.
Maybe within the home, if you are trying to build jataragni,
it could be somewhat focused towards health and well-being.
If a nominal amount of food is offered, it's okay.
If you are throwing half the food into it,
you don't have much confidence in your cooking, you know
In the Indian tradition, an aarti and doing pooja with fire is common.
What is it that happens when one does aarti to a guru,
a photo of a god or an idol or on the Ganga,
and then people take the aarti to apply it to their face.
Does something change in the fire after the aarti?
It is not that the fire changes. As we already said, what you're talking is the reverse
engineering of what I already spoke, in the sense – if…
if a certain form is exuding certain energy
and you do not know or you do not have the capability
to simply connect with it and you want to connect with it,
fire is a good medium to bring both of you together.
As we have been Saying fire has been used in so many ways to bond with each other.
Without fire, there is no wedding in India because it is being used as a bond
to bring people together.
And whether the fire is… extra fire is being used or
people's jataragni in the form of their passions
is burning through and coming together, whichever way, without fire there is no union
of any kind.
Whether physical kind, emotional kind or spiritual kind,
without fire there is no union. Taking this further, if a certain form
either in the form of a picture or a deity,
if it is exuding certain energy,
to make yourself available to it,
fire is a good means.
So you will see, enter the Devi temple, if a few people go stand there – fire,
so that they will connect.
It's not that she will not connect without fire, she will.
But to make you conducive to it, to make you available to it,
to make it the way where…
If… See, if you're looking at in a elemental way,
you cannot connect with whatever the earth and water
that is there in somebody or something.
But if fire is built between people, something gets connected.
So, this entire process is to connect you
with that dimension. So, the fire which goes around the deity
has acquired that. The aura of the fire, not the fire itself,
the akash around the fire
has acquired a quality of the divine. So,
when it comes to you, you don't put your hand into the fire, around that
you take the akash and put it to your eyes
or put it on top your head or put it to your heart.
You want to take the akash and you want to benefit from that.
You are trying to take some element of the divine
for your own benefit to take it and make it a part of yourself.
So, the whole aarti process is an effort in this direction.
It is…
These are all different things that can assist a person
to slowly develop your own fire. But above all, in the yogic system,
there are various processes where no fire is lit,
all the fires lit are within.
So, this is what you hear from ancient times, the yogis were doing tapas.
The word tapa means heat or fire.
So, you are generating your own fire. What kind of fire? Do you want jataragni,
do you want chitagni, do you want bhootagni or do you want sarvagni?
Accordingly, there are different types of sadhanas for one to do, so that
one can benefit from that.
So, external help
is needed when internal
possibilities are not so big.
But internal possibilities, if they are created,
no external help is needed. That's a simple aspect of it.